chore(#620): move cht-conf readme file (#1451)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/contribute/code/conf/installation.md

---
title: "CHT Conf installation"
linkTitle: "CHT Conf installation"
weight: 1
description: >
  Installing the CHT Conf in your local environment.
---

# Requirements
- nodejs 18 or later
- python 3

> - or Docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Docker(optional)
```

> - or Docker

Reviewer: Is Docker optional?

Author: Yes it is, I don’t use `cht-conf` through docker

Reviewer 2: As with the Currently Supported docs above, this page feels like "usage" documentation rather than "contributor" documentation. Perhaps we should include it in a new CHT Conf page under core/overview?

Then here in the contribution docs we would not that Docker is required for _developing_ cht-conf.

npm install -g cht-conf
python -m pip install git+https://github.com/medic/pyxform.git@medic-conf-1.17#egg=pyxform-medic --upgrade
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

## Using Docker
CHT Conf can also be run from within a Docker container. This is useful if you are already familiar with Docker and do not wish to configure the various dependencies required for developing CHT apps on your local machine. The necessary dependencies are pre-packaged in the Docker image.

### Using the image
The Docker image can be used as a [VS Code Development Container](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/containers) (easiest) or as a standalone Docker utility.

Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/). If you are using Windows, you also need to enable the [Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL2)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) to perform the following steps.

#### VS Code Development Container
If you want to develop CHT apps with VS Code, you can use the Docker image as a Development Container. This will allow you to use the `cht-conf` utility and its associated tech stack from within VS Code (without needing to install dependencies like NodeJS on your host system).

> See the [CHT Documentation](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/apps/tutorials/local-setup/#developing-with-vs-code-dev-container) for more information on building CHT apps with VS Code Development Containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look through [Developing with VS Code Dev Container Documentation](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/apps/tutorials/local-setup/#developing-with-vs-code-dev-container) to get more information .
```

#### Standalone Docker utility
If you are not using VS Code, you can use the Docker image as a standalone utility from the command line. Instead of using the `cht ...` command, you can run `docker run -it --rm -v "$PWD":/workdir medicmobile/cht-app-ide ....` This will create an ephemeral container with access to your current directory that will run the given cht command. (Do not include the `cht` part of the command, just your desired actions/parameters.)

Run the following command inside the project directory to bootstrap your new CHT project:
```shell
docker run -it --rm -v "$PWD":/workdir medicmobile/cht-app-ide initialise-project-layout
```

### Note on connecting to a local CHT instance
When using `cht-conf` within a Docker container to connect to a CHT instance that is running on your local machine (e.g. a development instance), you cannot use the `--local` flag or `localhost` in your `--url` parameter (since these will be interpreted as "local to the container").

> It is recommended to run a local CHT instance using the [CHT Docker Helper script](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/apps/guides/hosting/4.x/app-developer/). You can connect to the resulting `...my.local-ip.co` URL from the Docker container (or the VS Code terminal). (Just make sure the port your CHT instance is hosted on is not blocked by your firewall).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to run a local CHT instance using the [CHT Docker Helper script](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/apps/guides/hosting/4.x/app-developer/). You can connect to the resulting `...my.local-ip.co` URL from the Docker container (or the VS Code terminal). Ensure the port your CHT instance is hosted on is not blocked by your firewall.
```

## Bash completion
To enable tab completion in bash, add the following to your `.bashrc`/`.bash_profile`:
```shell
eval "$(cht-conf --shell-completion=bash)"
```

> ## Upgrading

Reviewer: Do we run the command indicated here or `npm update cht-conf` as indicated [here](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/apps/guides/updates/preparing-for-4/#cht-conf).
`

Author: That is a really good question, this is the result that I got from the two commands:

```shell
up to date in 576ms
➜  ~ npm update cht-conf

up to date in 500ms
➜  ~ npm install -g cht-conf
npm warn deprecated inflight@1.0.6: This module is not supported, and leaks memory. Do not use it. Check out lru-cache if you want a good and tested way to coalesce async requests by a key value, which is much more comprehensive and powerful.
npm warn deprecated source-map-url@0.4.1: See https://github.com/lydell/source-map-url#deprecated
npm warn deprecated move-concurrently@1.0.1: This package is no longer supported.
npm warn deprecated stable@0.1.8: Modern JS already guarantees Array#sort() is a stable sort, so this library is deprecated. See the compatibility table on MDN: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort#browser_compatibility
npm warn deprecated figgy-pudding@3.5.2: This module is no longer supported.
npm warn deprecated rimraf@2.6.3: Rimraf versions prior to v4 are no longer supported
npm warn deprecated request-promise-native@1.0.9: request-promise-native has been deprecated because it extends the now deprecated request package, see https://github.com/request/request/issues/3142
npm warn deprecated urix@0.1.0: Please see https://github.com/lydell/urix#deprecated
npm warn deprecated har-validator@5.1.5: this library is no longer supported
npm warn deprecated copy-concurrently@1.0.5: This package is no longer supported.
npm warn deprecated resolve-url@0.2.1: https://github.com/lydell/resolve-url#deprecated
npm warn deprecated glob@7.2.3: Glob versions prior to v9 are no longer supported
npm warn deprecated source-map-resolve@0.5.3: See https://github.com/lydell/source-map-resolve#deprecated
npm warn deprecated q@1.5.1: You or someone you depend on is using Q, the JavaScript Promise library that gave JavaScript developers strong feelings about promises. They can almost certainly migrate to the native JavaScript promise now. Thank you literally everyone for joining me in this bet against the odds. Be excellent to each other.
npm warn deprecated
npm warn deprecated (For a CapTP with native promises, see @endo/eventual-send and @endo/captp)
npm warn deprecated xmldom@0.1.19: Deprecated due to CVE-2021-21366 resolved in 0.5.0
npm warn deprecated fs-write-stream-atomic@1.0.10: This package is no longer supported.
npm warn deprecated fsevents@1.2.13: The v1 package contains DANGEROUS / INSECURE binaries. Upgrade to safe fsevents v2
npm warn deprecated chokidar@2.1.8: Chokidar 2 does not receive security updates since 2019. Upgrade to chokidar 3 with 15x fewer dependencies
npm warn deprecated eslint-loader@3.0.4: This loader has been deprecated. Please use eslint-webpack-plugin
npm warn deprecated uuid@3.4.0: Please upgrade  to version 7 or higher.  Older versions may use Math.random() in certain circumstances, which is known to be problematic.  See https://v8.dev/blog/math-random for details.
npm warn deprecated request@2.88.2: request has been deprecated, see https://github.com/request/request/issues/3142
npm warn deprecated messageformat@2.3.0: Package renamed as '@messageformat/core', see messageformat.github.io for more details. 'messageformat@4' will eventually provide a polyfill for Intl.MessageFormat, once it's been defined by Unicode & ECMA.
npm warn deprecated json2csv@4.5.4: Package no longer supported. Contact Support at https://www.npmjs.com/support for more info.
npm warn deprecated svgo@1.3.2: This SVGO version is no longer supported. Upgrade to v2.x.x.

added 719 packages in 50s
```

@jkuester, @m5r, Could you please help also with this question? what command is better to upgrade `cht-conf`?

Reviewer 3: It depends how app devs installed cht-conf and how they run it. If they installed it globally with `npm install -g cht-conf` then they will need to use `npm update -g cht-conf` to update it. But if they installed it within their project with `npm install cht-conf`, then they can run `npm update cht-conf` to update it.

Reviewer: Alright @m5r , so we should indicate `npm update -g cht-conf` because it would update in either cases right?

Reviewer 2: @esthermmoturi I think the docs you originally linked to are more focused on updating a _config_ project where the `package.json` might depend on an old version of cht-conf.  In that case, running `npm update cht-conf` is correct since it will change the version in the `package.json` file.  

I do not think that a config project has to have cht-conf in its dependencies (though it is probably a "best practice").  App developers can just install cht-conf globally (via `npm install -g cht-conf`) and then use this version when working with their config.

Since the installation steps above describe installing cht-conf globally, I think it make sense here to just describe how to update the global install (so just say `npm update -g cht-conf`).
